[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: And now let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: When I was growing up in India in the 1980s, making phone calls wasn't the easiest thing
[Amit Varma]: in the world.
[Amit Varma]: The government had a monopoly on providing telephones, and the waiting list for a telephone
[Amit Varma]: could extend to five years or more.
[Amit Varma]: I was a privileged kid, my father was in the AIS, so we had a phone at home.
[Amit Varma]: But even for a privileged kid like me, air travel was a luxury.
[Amit Varma]: You guessed it, the state had a monopoly on airlines as well.
[Amit Varma]: All we had then was Air India and Indian Airlines.
[Amit Varma]: Airlines were prohibitively expensive for most people, including us.
[Amit Varma]: That changed in the 1990s, when India was forced to liberalize because of the balance
[Amit Varma]: of payments crisis of 1991.
[Amit Varma]: Telecoms and airlines were thrown open to private players, whose incentives were different
[Amit Varma]: from the government.
[Amit Varma]: The government survives because it has a monopoly on violence.
[Amit Varma]: When it needs more money, it simply takes it from us the people, the bakras, its subjects,
[Amit Varma]: by force.
[Amit Varma]: Private players in a free market, when they are not cronies of the government, have only
[Amit Varma]: one way to survive.
[Amit Varma]: They need to provide value to their customers.
[Amit Varma]: The freer the markets, the more the competition, the harder they have to try.
[Amit Varma]: And relatively free markets transform telecom and airlines.
[Amit Varma]: Today if you want a phone, you don't have to wait for five years.
[Amit Varma]: You can get it in five minutes at a very low price, without having to bribe anyone.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, air travel is affordable for vastly more people than it used to be.
[Amit Varma]: Now all this is very nice, but useful as telephones and airlines are, there is one thing that
[Amit Varma]: is far more important for us, and for our nation, education.
[Amit Varma]: The government has done a terrible job of providing education to its people for over
[Amit Varma]: 70 years.
[Amit Varma]: As bad as it used to do in telecoms and airlines before those markets were opened up.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, there are enormous restraints on private players in the marketplace, especially
[Amit Varma]: those who provide budget education to the poor, which, contrary to popular stereotype,
[Amit Varma]: is a majority of private schools.
[Amit Varma]: In less important fields like telecom and airlines, the government has allowed society
[Amit Varma]: to help itself, which is basically what markets do.
[Amit Varma]: But not in the case of education, and our children still suffer for this.
[Amit Varma]: This is a crime.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about education in India.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest is my friend Amit Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: Amit has been a researcher and activist in the field of education since the early days
[Amit Varma]: of the century, working first for the Center for Civil Society, and now with NISA, or the
[Amit Varma]: National Independent Schools Alliance.
[Amit Varma]: He has strong thoughts on education.
[Amit Varma]: He terms it a fraud committed on the people of India by the government.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, we decided not to talk about the many solutions people offer, like school
[Amit Varma]: vouchers and so on, but just describe the scope of this fraud, which, in our opinion,
[Amit Varma]: is actually inevitable because of the way the incentives of government are structured.
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes on education before, you can find them on seen and seen.in, but this
[Amit Varma]: was the longest and most comprehensive one so far, so do listen in.
[Amit Varma]: But first, before that, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IVM Podcast, who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcast.com or download the IVM app, and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast, hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There's a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Saurabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one roof, or rather, all in one
[Amit Varma]: app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Amit, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Amit, all of us know, I mean, all Indians know that we have a problem with education.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, that problem is not just restricted to like the education sector and
[Amit Varma]: children studying and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It cuts across every level of society, even the unemployment problem that we have in India
[Amit Varma]: today, to some extent is because our education isn't skilling people enough, and you see
[Amit Varma]: so many people come out of the education system and actually not be good for anything.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that you have worked in this field for more than a decade and a half and you
[Amit Varma]: have very deep and strongly felt feelings about what is happening in education in this
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: You've often described it as a fraud.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like you today to elaborate on different aspects of our education system and the politics
[Amit Varma]: behind it.
[Amit Varma]: What is been your biggest learning in all these years?
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me on your show.
[Guest]: Yeah, so one insight after working for so such a long year in education sector, I realized
[Guest]: that something that we are not doing right to our next generation and somehow for whatever
[Guest]: reason, reasons we can explore later.
[Guest]: But what we are doing, it won't be wrong if we simply call it that we are frauding our
[Guest]: next generation.
[Guest]: And we, our system is frauding our own children.
[Guest]: One simple way to give you why I'm saying and why I have such a strong opinion is, you
[Guest]: would know recently by the government, there were advertisements for government jobs and
[Guest]: those were of peons and chaprasis and all of that kind.
[Guest]: And you know that for thousand position, you get applications of millions, which would
[Guest]: also include applications by those who have done MBA, LLB, even PhD, they're applying
[Guest]: for a job of peon.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: It simply means the certificate that they are holding, it might say that you are a B-take,
[Guest]: you are engineering graduate, but they don't have that skill, neither they think that they
[Guest]: are able to, they have those skills to claim themselves as their rightful position of engineers,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that simply gives you an indication that this entire system, which has designed and
[Guest]: which you have not a fake certificate, it's an original certificate, while there have
[Guest]: been several debates about people with fake certificates, also, this is original certificate,
[Guest]: but it has completely artificial value, it has no real value.
[Guest]: And therefore, I say we are cheating our own students, we are cheating our people.
[Amit Varma]: And this is what, you know, activists like you called degree inflation, that you have
[Amit Varma]: an inflation in degrees and these degrees are meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: And these degrees, of course, are degrees which the ones you mentioned, LLB, MBA, they
[Amit Varma]: come at a much later stage.
[Amit Varma]: But according to you, the fraud starts right from the earliest stage of schooling, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, surveys like the famous ACER reports, and so on, listeners should search for these
[Amit Varma]: ACER reports on Google, A-S-E-R, and they show learning outcomes across the country.
[Amit Varma]: And they are mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: They talk about how people in 10th standard can't add or subtract or, you know, put a
[Amit Varma]: sentence together and they are in just, you know, and even by forget come out with a degree
[Amit Varma]: later on, even before they get to that stage, they are unequipped for anything.
[Guest]: What has gone wrong?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And at times, I think why there is no human cry about either ACER report or similar government
[Guest]: reports also.
[Guest]: So if you know, when PISA report came in 2010, India was ranked, if I'm correct, 72nd out
[Guest]: of 73 countries only next to Kazakhstan on the learning outcome.
[Guest]: And that to think of what was the most interesting part was the response from the government.
[Guest]: Government decided not to participate in PISA assessment and ranking from next year onwards,
[Guest]: which is, to me, something shooting the messenger, shooting the messenger, exactly, instead of
[Guest]: taking that as a benchmark and learning and finding out what is wrong.
[Guest]: And you say, okay, next round of PISA report, we'll put a benchmark for ourselves and we
[Guest]: come up with better ranking, something what we are doing now on ease of doing business
[Guest]: index, right.
[Guest]: But the response in 2010 was government decided not to participate in it.
[Guest]: And they could also criticize and give certain reasons about methodology and foreign style
[Guest]: of conducting assessments and all.
[Guest]: But when ACER did it, ACER also shows pathetic learning outcome.
[Guest]: What is that?
[Guest]: It says 6th grade students, 64% of 6th grade students cannot do basic Hindi, English and
[Guest]: maths of 2nd grade.
[Guest]: I mean, 64% of 6th grade students not able to do 2nd grade learning outcome.
[Guest]: What does it indicate?
[Guest]: I mean, certainly massively we have failed to deliver what is basics and they also do
[Guest]: a basic assessment.
[Guest]: Even if we are not able to provide that, we should fire ourselves as simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: It's a criminal activity.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the tragic things here is that, you know, we the elites who have the most
[Amit Varma]: volume in media and all of that, and we think, hey, our kids are going to a good school.
[Amit Varma]: And we sort of ignore this as not as big a deal as it is, but it just impacts everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And we're talking about the point you made that if a 6th standard kid cannot show learning
[Amit Varma]: outcomes of 2nd standard, 64% of them.
[Amit Varma]: Also consider what it does as you go down the road, when he reaches a 7th standard,
[Amit Varma]: can he even understand what is being taught?
[Amit Varma]: He won't be able to cope.
[Amit Varma]: And when he's not able to cope with that learning, it affects your self-confidence, it affects
[Amit Varma]: your morale, it affects your eagerness to learn more and more, it creates a vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle and we just lose generations of children like this.
[Guest]: Okay, let me tell you something very interesting here as well.
[Guest]: So first thing is certainly we have failed to deliver whatever is even basic desirable
[Guest]: result we were thinking of.
[Guest]: Now, government had in 2009 passed this act called Right to Education Act, wherein their
[Guest]: idea was that they will have 100% literacy rate and therefore also 100% school enrollment.
[Guest]: Now since the quality is so bad, and if you look into data, I have actually also brought
[Guest]: this report in case we need to dig data, that students, and you have rightly pointed out,
[Guest]: are migrating, they're abandoning government schools and coming to private schools.
[Guest]: That's one reason for quality.
[Guest]: But whatever students they have, they are not able to teach and they have set the goal
[Guest]: of 100% literacy.
[Guest]: Now then think of what they are doing wrong to meet the goal without teaching.
[Guest]: And that is how they have beautifully exploited this provision of Right to Education Act called
[Guest]: No Detention Policy, which means up to 8th grade, well certainly there is a fascinating
[Guest]: way of justifying No Detention Policy as well.
[Guest]: Or there could be a sincere logic also, I don't really want to get into it, but how
[Guest]: that has been used.
[Guest]: Up to 8th standard, then you don't fail at all, which simply means it's a mass certification
[Guest]: program without any assessment.
[Guest]: So up to 8th you keep coming to my place, there is nothing and at the end I give you
[Guest]: a degree or a certificate saying you are 8th pass and we achieve as a nation 100% literacy.
[Amit Varma]: And because you need to do nothing to get to that 8th pass point, that immediately becomes
[Amit Varma]: meaningless and therefore all the way down the line other certificates also become meaningless
[Amit Varma]: because a certificate has no correlation with the learning.
[Guest]: It has nothing.
[Guest]: And let's say government school students, it has similar kind of impact on private
[Guest]: schools as well.
[Guest]: So private schools who are being in some sense glamorized or justified in terms of doing
[Guest]: well etc. or students who are growing up or we call millenials who are growing up that
[Guest]: thinking okay the assessment is student centric etc. we have not failed blah blah blah.
[Guest]: But the moment they are going to 10th standard or 12th standard or later, they realize that
[Guest]: they know nothing or almost nothing or they get through a psychological situation where
[Guest]: they are certainly reflecting upon themselves that all along they have been kind of applauded
[Guest]: for doing what they are doing and later on they realize that possibly what they were
[Guest]: doing was certainly not wrong for almost everything for which they were given 3 stars or 5 stars.
[Guest]: And which later on if they finally get into some kind of let's say medical or engineering
[Guest]: good colleges, you also see that increasing rate of societal where students are actually
[Guest]: not able to cope up.
[Guest]: Now there is family pressure also they have paid some good fee or donation or whatever
[Guest]: and got a seat of let's say medical or engineering in high reputed college and under society
[Guest]: and parents and peer pressure they know that they got into this good college.
[Guest]: But if they are not able to cope up they don't want to go back to family and say I am a failure
[Guest]: and that is where I believe there is that is also one of the factors leading to increase
[Guest]: societal attempts among students.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean exactly like this is so basic that a failure in our education leads to a failure
[Amit Varma]: in every aspect of our society it affects everything.
[Amit Varma]: It affects our employment situations because as much as the fact that there aren't enough
[Amit Varma]: jobs being generated there is also the fact that we are churning out millions of people
[Amit Varma]: with the degrees that really are meaningless and they are not equipped in the job market.
[Amit Varma]: This affects their confidence and their sense of self worth and it's just a massive social
[Amit Varma]: problem.
[Amit Varma]: So for a moment you know and I think this is something all my listeners would agree
[Amit Varma]: on that even if within whatever elite cocoons and I'm assuming that everyone who listens
[Amit Varma]: to the podcast is elite in some way right like you and me but whatever life may be like
[Amit Varma]: there in the cocoons I think everybody agrees education in India is badly broken.
[Amit Varma]: Now what I want your sort of insights on and you've been in the field doing all this work
[Amit Varma]: for 15 years not just at the micro level but at a broader level of fixing policy and trying
[Amit Varma]: to fix the structure of education in the country take me through some of the root causes for
[Amit Varma]: this problem.
[Guest]: This is something very difficult to identify one root cause.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a laundry list whatever comes to mind let's just go with because we have created
[Guest]: such a mess now even this mess has piled up so big decoding the root of the mess is too
[Guest]: difficult but one thing certainly I would say is we have highly politicized and bureaucratized
[Guest]: our education system that is certainly not acceptable.
[Guest]: In terms of this you can see some sense of nationalization or controlling the entire
[Guest]: education system and which is also very discriminatory and one thing also I talk about is it's pretty
[Guest]: anti-poor while certainly government may claim that almost everything is free if you get
[Guest]: into government schools and you might find that their per child expenditure per year
[Guest]: goes ranges between 30,000 to 60,000 rupees.
[Guest]: So if that is the amount being spent on per child per year then certainly it is a massive
[Guest]: expenditure and that is the price on which you can in some private schools you can find
[Guest]: decent education that's one.
[Guest]: Second thing happens to be that government lets out norms for all kinds of schooling.
[Guest]: I'll give you example if you if let's say you want to start a school in urban area you
[Guest]: need one acre of land if you want CBSE affiliated schools or if it is a rural area around two
[Guest]: acres of land and thereafter the number of classrooms so for each section there should
[Guest]: be or for each class there should be a separate room, principal's rooms, teacher's room, library,
[Guest]: separate toilets, separate drinking water, laboratory etc etc, playground, size of your
[Guest]: staircases, size of window, fire and safety requirements and everything.
[Guest]: If by this norm if any tier one or tier two city that you want to start a school you would
[Guest]: require an investment today of at least around 50 crores to start one school and that is
[Guest]: only when I'm talking just money.
[Guest]: It also has a number of licenses and permissions and which on an average goes around 30 licenses
[Guest]: or permissions altogether and therefore what you see if school is being started at this
[Guest]: cost at this price and it also gets thousand students enrollment your price point happens
[Guest]: to be very high so simply it doesn't make sense in economic terms and the moment the
[Guest]: price is very high which simply means only elite or few people can afford schooling rest
[Guest]: are supposed to go to government or municipality schools which certainly are not giving desired
[Guest]: results and that is what led to private school revolution in India.
[Amit Varma]: So before I come and I want to talk about this private school revolution in India and
[Amit Varma]: especially the rise of budget private schools and parents of the poorest families voting
[Amit Varma]: with their feet and taking their kid out of government schools and putting them into budget
[Amit Varma]: private schools which are like operating in holes in the walls and paying for that sums
[Amit Varma]: of money which will seem trivial to us but means a lot to them.
[Amit Varma]: But before I come to that I want to address like three broad points that you raised at
[Amit Varma]: the start of your answer where you spoke about politicization of education, bureaucratization
[Amit Varma]: of education and first I want to address a great point you made about the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: attitude of nationalization of education where you have a sort of a command and control way
[Amit Varma]: of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: So let me sort of try to paraphrase what that might be and you tell me if you agree with
[Amit Varma]: the assessment and what you can add to that is that in education what we have tended to
[Amit Varma]: do is that like in all parts of our economy after independence we decided that we need
[Amit Varma]: a command and control structure and especially because it is so important the government
[Amit Varma]: needs to make sure that education is provided to the people and one of the things they did
[Amit Varma]: was not just pour money into education and government schools and all which is great,
[Amit Varma]: but they also stopped the private sector from coming up, they placed restrictions like you
[Amit Varma]: cannot open a school for profit which came out of a mistaken notion that profit is a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing necessarily while you can really only get profit by benefiting society.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had an episode on this a long time back which listeners can find at seen unseen
[Amit Varma]: radhai and the profit motive in education with Parth Shah and the result of that was
[Amit Varma]: that while there was this demand for quality education, the supply wasn't allowed.
[Amit Varma]: The government said no, we will do the supply and there were too many restrictions on private
[Amit Varma]: schools.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a profit motive around which people find ways like you have trusts and all that,
[Amit Varma]: but you have to find jogar ways around it and the other is a kind of regulations you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that your playground has to be this size, you need to have so many toilets,
[Amit Varma]: you need to have falana dhimkana rather than leave it to the market and leave it to parents
[Amit Varma]: to decide what kind of school they want to send their kid to, they restrict the supply
[Amit Varma]: so badly that there is a massive shortfall there, which the government itself because
[Amit Varma]: of incentives can't really provide.
[Amit Varma]: So structurally firstly, have I summarized it correctly?
[Guest]: Pretty much, pretty much, in fact something that you were talking about and the norms
[Guest]: I talked about is, before 2009, before Right to Education Act, unrecognized schools also
[Guest]: could operate and there was number of unrecognized schools which are giving only primary education,
[Guest]: they could operate but RT Act has made it mandatory to be recognized and actually what
[Guest]: that has led to, post this act around 20,000 schools have already closed down, so 20,000
[Guest]: low-cost private schools which came up as an alternative, as what you talked about parents
[Guest]: are choosing by feet and they are also paying money because they think that education is
[Guest]: their only hope, if you want to change whatever poor people have gone through and they want
[Guest]: to change their fortune, finally is for the next generation through education, otherwise
[Guest]: they know that they don't have a huge investment to set up a business or something like that
[Guest]: and that is also being closed down and therefore that leads to this major question and that's
[Guest]: why I really want to very strongly say everything is fraud in education, that we are certainly
[Guest]: cheating our next generation and if then we are thinking of something like Make in India
[Guest]: or Start of India etc etc, it's all just shame, I mean we can't do basics, while I talked
[Guest]: about politicization, you also have to think about why all of these things have sustained
[Guest]: for so long, how come we were able to control, while talking about education any bureaucrat
[Guest]: would give you a reply that education is a state subject, so there is nothing called
[Guest]: nationalization etc, but directly or indirectly it's all controlled by governments, certainly
[Guest]: they have certain liberty to pick up which language to use etc etc, but by and large
[Guest]: they follow NCRT curriculum and there is a similar trend, so what let's say Gujarat adopts
[Guest]: also Maharashtra adopts and then Karnataka adopts etc and it spreads out, when I also
[Guest]: talked about politicization of education, specifically you should look for politicians
[Guest]: who are either coming from education background or are highly influenced by people in education,
[Guest]: so something like that has happened is union of government school teachers, something I
[Guest]: specifically point out and the kind of role that they play in education policy or its
[Guest]: execution is, we know that there is no accountability, I mean one of the reason why it happens to
[Guest]: be a very lucrative occupation is, this is the only job where you are, the school operates
[Guest]: for 210 days or something around it, it's largely their day or in case there are second
[Guest]: shifts it's a 4 to 6 hours job, with as number of holidays and decent pay per week.
[Amit Varma]: And despite that there are huge rates of absenteeism in government schools.
[Guest]: There was a report by World Bank which says on any day around 25% of teachers are absent,
[Guest]: which means one-fourth, randomly and those who are there, they are not motivated or you
[Guest]: can also look into who all are going into this government teaching occupation.
[Guest]: Those who are looking to become a great teacher, certainly not, all those what they are looking
[Guest]: for a one state job, a government safe secure job, their motivation is certainly not teaching,
[Guest]: however I'm not kind of vilifying all of those young talent which is getting into.
[Amit Varma]: It's a structural issue, it's not like individuals are at fault, those teachers are at fault,
[Amit Varma]: they are in a sense also victims.
[Guest]: Right, they are also victims and that is also good, I have actually a friend who got into
[Guest]: government job as a school teacher and she had to pay bribe to just claim her salary.
[Guest]: Anyways, so the other role I wanted to point was the role of teacher union.
[Guest]: Also because teacher happens to be an influential personality in any community, which has been
[Guest]: so good, I mean we have been proud of that.
[Guest]: But since they are influential, no political representative actually want to get into anything
[Guest]: which causes conflict or confrontation, right.
[Guest]: Also if you get into a little further more detail, when voting happens and polling happens,
[Guest]: the only person present inside the polling booth is a teacher because all of these teachers
[Guest]: have polling duty.
[Guest]: And you know inside they can either influence the voters or do any mess thing which you
[Guest]: don't really want to get into and therefore they are able to influence political parties
[Guest]: who come or go in government and therefore they are able to control it.
[Guest]: And that is one of the reasons why you find in Right to Education Act all kind of norms
[Guest]: in terms of input or school recognition, salary, qualification, but not as much in terms of
[Guest]: duty and if duty is not being performed, accountability or penalty or punishment or whatever you could
[Guest]: think of.
[Guest]: That's completely not there.
[Guest]: And therefore, so what happens is it's politicized, the entire management of education, management
[Guest]: in government schools is not done by management professionals.
[Guest]: It's all done by bureaucrats.
[Guest]: So those will be block education officers or district education officers or education
[Guest]: secretary or additional secretaries.
[Guest]: They all completely behave like inspectors who are coming here to inspect, penalize and
[Guest]: in the process also make money for themselves, frankly speaking, and that happens to be the
[Guest]: only aim.
[Guest]: Nowhere, I will tell you one incident, I was in a school in Trichy, I was visiting and
[Guest]: I was interacting with the school leaders and they said their experience.
[Guest]: One of the guy told me that 10-20 years ago, when education officers used to visit schools,
[Guest]: we used to prepare students, ki wo aayega, ye puchega, ye bolega, to kaise jawab doge,
[Guest]: kya karoge, kaise khade hona hai, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Now when the education officer comes to visit school, we prepare the building.
[Guest]: So that the toilet is fixed, there is drinking water, it's in clean, it's painted, the benches
[Guest]: are there, those sprinklers are there or fire safety equipment is there.
[Guest]: So all of that focus has completely shifted on input rather than quality of education
[Guest]: and output and which I don't see improving as long as the bureaucrats leading it.
[Guest]: There has to be some kind of educationist coming in the role and they deciding or at
[Guest]: least working together with schools, figuring out what is wrong happening.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to examine, I want to go a little further into this point and examine the interplay
[Amit Varma]: between power, accountability and incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another week on IBM.
[Unknown]: It's been a great week.
[Unknown]: And if you aren't following us on social media, please do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: On GeekFruit this week, Tejas and Dinkar discuss their favorite movie soundtracks.
[Unknown]: On The Scene and The Unseen, Amit Verma talks to researcher and activist Amit Chandra and
[Unknown]: they dissect India's education sector.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, we have writer and director Anand Sivakumaran, who's hosting a great new
[Unknown]: show for us called Croc Tales as well.
[Unknown]: Anand and Cyrus talk about how Anand journeyed from an engineer to a full-time writer.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, Narayan, Chuck and Sriket go to the root of the word assassin and twisted
[Unknown]: an interesting history behind it.
[Unknown]: This week on Shunioon, we're joined by Sanjay Nath, who is a co-founder and managing partner
[Unknown]: at Bloom Ventures.
[Unknown]: We have a really interesting conversation about investing.
[Unknown]: On Marble's Lost and Found, Zain and Avanti talk to a psychotherapist, Alisha Halani.
[Unknown]: And also this week marks the 50th episode of the Pragati podcast.
[Unknown]: Hosts Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan Srinath sit down to talk about the long strange trip
[Unknown]: has been and also round up some of the recent news.
[Unknown]: And with that, I'm going to take you on to your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, we are discussing the state of education in India.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest is Amit Chandra, who's been a researcher and activist in this area for more
[Amit Varma]: than a decade and a half and has very deep insights about it.
[Amit Varma]: And before the break, Amit, you were talking about how teachers unions are so strong and
[Amit Varma]: they're a very powerful interest group, and therefore they control a lot of the politics
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me if my understanding is correct, because I kind of try to look everything through
[Amit Varma]: the economic lens of what are the incentives.
[Guest]: And before we get into, because then we are going to the next step of discussion, let
[Guest]: me give you one more example, which tells you when I say fraud at several levels of
[Guest]: fraud, not only with the kids, with the system, with the teacher, with the quality, almost
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: Go ahead.
[Guest]: Very recently, CAG, which is the auditing body, came up with its report, and it estimated
[Guest]: 1.1 crore fake student enrollment in government schools of Uttar Pradesh alone.
[Guest]: That's more than 10 million people.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Fake enrollment.
[Guest]: Fake student enrollment.
[Guest]: Now, you would wonder why there are fake student enrollment.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Yes, because that decides the amount of fund you would get.
[Guest]: You know, there is a midday meal scheme.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, assume the cost per child per day is 10 rupees, right?
[Guest]: What does it mean?
[Amit Varma]: 10 crore rupees every day is 100 crore per day expenditure on midday meals.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Which is going into someone's pocket.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Then there are altogether 14 kind of freebies, which is given shoes, socks, uniform, textbooks,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Stationery, all of those.
[Guest]: Then the teacher positions are created and all this transfer posting appointment happens
[Guest]: on the basis of number of students there.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And also you want to increase your enrollment and you show you are performing better.
[Guest]: There is also now, at least with ASER and government data, even MHRD is conducting,
[Guest]: there is NAS.
[Guest]: So now the data is being collected that whether students are enrolled or not coming or not.
[Guest]: So you are fuzzing all the data to show that students are there and they are coming.
[Guest]: However, they are not present in school.
[Guest]: They are not learning all the money is being eaten or drunken by others.
[Amit Varma]: With all the different freebies and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is such an amazing illustration of how government inevitably tends to descend
[Amit Varma]: into a parasitic role and everything in India, especially just becomes a jhol.
[Amit Varma]: But to get back to the question of incentives, which I think is worth unpacking for our listeners,
[Amit Varma]: is that because teachers in government schools essentially have power without accountability
[Amit Varma]: because they are teachers, they are tenured, they get the salary they get, but they are
[Amit Varma]: not actually held accountable in terms of the kind of education they provide.
[Amit Varma]: And very often there are more teachers than you need because if there are so many fake
[Amit Varma]: students and you have to maintain a student teacher ratio that rationalizes the appointment
[Amit Varma]: of many more teachers who are not required and who probably won't show up to work.
[Amit Varma]: And because the incentives are so flawed, because they don't actually need to deliver,
[Amit Varma]: unlike a private school, which is dependent on the fees coming in every month.
[Amit Varma]: So there's pressure to actually perform and compete.
[Amit Varma]: But because that pressure isn't here and the incentives are so bad, your learning outcomes
[Amit Varma]: are bad on a per capita basis, in the sense, I don't know whether it was you, but I heard
[Amit Varma]: this statistic recently about how the same outcomes are provided by private schools for
[Amit Varma]: one third the cost of a government school, the per student cost, despite the fact that
[Amit Varma]: you know, governments.
[Guest]: This study, this paper was done by Karthik Muralidharan in Hyderabad schools, wherein
[Guest]: he simply compared students of government schools and students of low cost private school,
[Guest]: not just private schools, very low cost with the similar kind of economic background of
[Guest]: students.
[Guest]: And he found that while the learning outcome in those low cost private school was slightly
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: So if you are comparing in terms of learning outcome, it's not great, slightly better.
[Guest]: But in terms of cost, those happens to be one third.
[Guest]: So one third of the same cost you can provide in low cost private school, something similar
[Guest]: quality education.
[Amit Varma]: So even if you're not providing a better education in an absolute sense, you are providing much
[Amit Varma]: more bang for the buck, which really matters for poor people.
[Amit Varma]: The reason you're doing and again, you know, it's often an unfair sort of rap, which is
[Amit Varma]: placed on libertarians like me that you think all government is bad and all private is good
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not the case at all.
[Amit Varma]: I just come at it from a point of view of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of education, who do you want to be in a position of power?
[Amit Varma]: You want the children and the parents of those children to be to be the people who have the
[Amit Varma]: power and who dictate the outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: And you want teachers to be accountable in terms of the education that they provide.
[Amit Varma]: And you have those incentives in private schools, including low cost private schools, where
[Amit Varma]: the parents will just walk with their feet and go elsewhere if they feel the education
[Amit Varma]: isn't good enough.
[Amit Varma]: But in a government school set up the way our school system is set up, that power is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the kids and their parents aren't empowered with that, because teachers are
[Amit Varma]: completely unaccountable.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, whenever any reform is proposed, the teachers will obviously oppose that reform,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, this brings accountability, that brings accountability, the system works
[Amit Varma]: so beautifully for them, why would they mess with it?
[Guest]: While we talked about this study by Karthik Muralidharan, let me also mention, and your
[Guest]: audience could find out a paper done by Professor Geeta Gandhikindan.
[Guest]: So what she did, she took all the learning outcome and kind of converted into units.
[Guest]: So units of learning, and compared with the cost, I don't remember exactly, but it comes
[Guest]: somewhere around, if I'm not mistaken, is that for each unit of learning outcome, if
[Guest]: you compare with government and private school, government schools spend 10 times more, so
[Guest]: it doesn't give you bang for the buck.
[Guest]: And the simple reason is, anywhere you go, private sector has efficiency, and that is
[Guest]: what they are known for.
[Guest]: And that actually leads to the, in case of accountability and designing system-wise,
[Guest]: you don't want even centrally designed or at a state level also, which also happens
[Guest]: to be like a centre, when we have states like UP, which is bigger than several countries,
[Guest]: why can't we trust parents, teachers, or people who are locally, or even students?
[Guest]: I mean, simply we ask students, at times we have wondered, if students had voting rights,
[Guest]: the scene today could have been different, because as we talked about politicians trying
[Guest]: not to take panga with teacher unions, the moment they would realize, okay, now students
[Guest]: have got voice and voting right.
[Guest]: And they would certainly force them to think about, could we think of a student-centric
[Guest]: education model, right?
[Guest]: So why can't we involve them?
[Guest]: Why can't we simply give them liberty?
[Guest]: And in case of India, it is common sense, before India becoming democratic, at least
[Guest]: electoral democratic, education in some sense, and even when Britishers came and introduced
[Guest]: formal education, it was almost free.
[Guest]: And there was no government and therefore there was no politicization or bureaucratization
[Guest]: of education.
[Guest]: So we have had history and in fact, if you get into the reports of James Tooley, he says,
[Guest]: in the British India, Bengal province alone had around five lakh schools.
[Guest]: And today, after like hundreds of years, today, altogether, we have around five lakh schools.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the number of schools that you could kind of compare only Bengal as a
[Guest]: state and currently entire India, and in those sense, the number of schools should have gone
[Guest]: up rather than going down or staying stable, while the population has gone at least 10
[Amit Varma]: times, no?
[Amit Varma]: Much more than that.
[Amit Varma]: And because the demand for quality education is always high, I mean, that's what parents
[Amit Varma]: really want a good education for their kids and but that the supply is not allowed to
[Amit Varma]: exist and the government system has essentially become parasitic, rather than, you know, actually
[Amit Varma]: trying to deliver outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: But the other point I want to address, and I'm sure you face this all, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: face this throughout your, the many years you've spent in this, is that when you talk
[Amit Varma]: of private schools, people often say, oh, private school to manga and you know, government
[Amit Varma]: schools are doing this social service and private schools are too expensive.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, that is a massive myth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as James Tooley himself pointed out, for example, in a beautiful book he wrote
[Amit Varma]: on the subject, all the papers and books that Amit is mentioning, by the way, will be linked
[Amit Varma]: at the bottom of the page of this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So do look for those.
[Amit Varma]: But to come back to the question, I mean, is it true that private schools are only for
[Amit Varma]: the rich?
[Guest]: Not at all, certainly not at all.
[Guest]: And therefore, I have brought this report also, this is called a report on budget private
[Guest]: schools in India.
[Guest]: And that is what, therefore, if you look into how schooling has developed in India, you'll
[Guest]: find at, let's, if we start from independence, country decided to go for a kind of state
[Guest]: taking responsibility of providing education.
[Guest]: However, they did not have capacity as much.
[Guest]: But thereafter started this idea of government schools and private schools.
[Guest]: But at that point of time, private schools were only for elite or some missionary schools
[Guest]: which were private, with the idea of also spreading religion or as they are called missionary
[Guest]: schools.
[Guest]: Similarly, not missionaries in terms of Christian itself, but also other religion.
[Guest]: But slowly as state realized that they don't have capacity, and in fact, if you go back
[Guest]: to the debates of drafting constitution, at that point of time, there was debate of having
[Guest]: something called right to education as a fundamental right, so that it's state's responsibility.
[Guest]: But the constitution makers, at least they realized that it's a new nation coming up,
[Guest]: and state doesn't have that capacity.
[Guest]: And therefore, they dropped the idea of keeping right to education as a fundamental right.
[Guest]: So by and large, coming to the point that there has been government schools and small
[Guest]: private schools and some missionary schools.
[Guest]: And thereafter, when government realized that there is a capacity issue, they started something
[Guest]: called aided private schools, which means it's a privately run school.
[Guest]: And if they are able to sustain it for more than three years, then government will pitch
[Guest]: in with funds, etc., which later on, because then government was funding it, they started
[Guest]: controlling it, it also become exactly like any government school.
[Guest]: And this third segment, which is private school, and if you read all of these education policies
[Guest]: with the national education policy of 1968 or 86 or 92, or the new one we were drafting
[Guest]: or State Education Act, you'll find it takes the view of government schooling.
[Guest]: So schooling through government institution or aided government institution, there will
[Guest]: be only a small segment which will say, if there are private school, what are the rules
[Guest]: and norms, etc.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it happens to be completely biased.
[Guest]: So you think of government schools, they are ours, we will run them.
[Guest]: But if it is a private school, then it has norms, guidelines or control mechanism.
[Guest]: So by approach itself, we are completely biased.
[Guest]: So government school is ours, we will run it, there is no set timeline, standard, or
[Guest]: if you have not delivered, what will be the penal mechanism, etc.
[Guest]: The approach that you take for private schools.
[Guest]: Anyway, so the main point I want to come to, that this low cost schools or budget private
[Guest]: schools, the revolution kind of that James Tooley talks about, I don't attribute it as
[Guest]: a success of policy.
[Guest]: What I say is, there is a revolution of low cost private school, because the policy provisions
[Guest]: failed.
[Guest]: Because as a policy issue, we never wanted private schools to flourish.
[Guest]: And therefore, now as government has challenged, and if you look at now the DICE data, almost
[Guest]: around 40% students are enrolled in private schools, now only around 60%.
[Guest]: And this I'm saying as a nationwide, you can also find some urban areas, specifically let's
[Guest]: say Hyderabad, Delhi or Mumbai, where majority of students you'll find going to private schools.
[Guest]: So the point I wanted to make is, this revolution has as a failure to policy design, neither
[Guest]: that policy was designed to promote it.
[Guest]: The other part to answer your question is, whether these are for only elite or rich people?
[Guest]: Certainly not.
[Guest]: Once again, I would refer to Professor Geeta Gandhi Kingdon's report, which is in the same
[Guest]: report.
[Guest]: The average monthly fee of private schools in UP comes around 250 rupees.
[Guest]: And therefore, now if you will also identify, as I travel a lot, I also interact with auto
[Guest]: rickshaw drivers, taxi drivers, even cycle rickshaw pullers.
[Guest]: And I have found that even poorest of poor such as cycle rickshaw puller, today, he would
[Guest]: prefer to skip a day's meal, but wants to send their children to a private school.
[Guest]: And certainly these are not elite private schools.
[Guest]: These are those low cost private schools.
[Guest]: So I would not say it is only for rich, certainly because of several policy provisions that
[Guest]: we talked, the cost happens to be inflated, which certainly through reforms could be brought
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's to me, it's a deeply poignant story that if someone who's earning three
[Amit Varma]: or 4000 a month, you know, is his household income, and he cares deeply about his kids
[Amit Varma]: education, because he wants them to go beyond what he has managed to do in his life, and
[Amit Varma]: he wants his kid to get an education.
[Amit Varma]: But the free government schools which are set up for that are simply not doing that.
[Amit Varma]: And he's actually paying money, which is a substantial amount of money for him to 50
[Amit Varma]: may not seem anything for us or 500 may not seem anything for us, but for those people
[Amit Varma]: is a substantial amount of money, but they're making that sacrifice, because it is their
[Amit Varma]: only way out.
[Amit Varma]: And then what they also see is that even those private schools that they send their kids
[Amit Varma]: to face these enormous, enormous challenges from the state itself.
[Guest]: And like you pointed out, those are the schools being closed down, those are your even I come
[Guest]: from a city called Banaras.
[Guest]: And at my house, there is a maid and maids and her children to a private school.
[Guest]: And that is the kind of schools being targeted now by the government, which I see completely
[Amit Varma]: it's injustice, it's inhuman.
[Amit Varma]: And you have 10s and 1000s of low cost private schools like that having to shut down because
[Amit Varma]: of government regulations, despite the fact that they came up in the first place because
[Amit Varma]: the government had failed to provide that education.
[Amit Varma]: And that just makes me so angry that I think that your term of anger for this, which is
[Amit Varma]: fraud is not sufficient.
[Amit Varma]: It's it's much worse than that.
[Amit Varma]: It's a crime on the people of our country.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, a lot of these things, activists like yourself have been talking about for
[Amit Varma]: a long time trying to raise awareness and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, parents of kids everywhere understand this, especially the poorer you
[Amit Varma]: go, the more they understand how bad things are.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I was told of some statistic recently, some that's a more than 80% of government
[Amit Varma]: school teachers send their children to private schools.
[Guest]: You know, what better evidence you require than this, not only teachers, all the politicians
[Guest]: even who advocate government schooling, they send their children to private schools and
[Guest]: they also since the money and power and sources, they're sending their kids to foreign schools.
[Guest]: So then they don't even have to teach here in the Indian curriculum.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and it's kind of obvious that the way this structure is a lot of interesting
[Amit Varma]: ways towards moving towards a solution emerge and let's not discuss any of those individually.
[Amit Varma]: But in terms of let's talk about what in the political economy makes change so difficult,
[Amit Varma]: like one thing you pointed out is that there are interest groups like government teachers
[Amit Varma]: unions which hold a certain amount of power, and they lobby politicians and they don't
[Amit Varma]: let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: So can you shed some more light on the incentives in the political economy and the different
[Amit Varma]: interest groups?
[Amit Varma]: And also earlier, like you've spoken a bit about the politicization of education, but
[Amit Varma]: you also mentioned bureaucratization of education.
[Guest]: So can you expand on that as well a little bit?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Let's come to that political economy thing first.
[Guest]: A little difficult to explain it in a short time.
[Guest]: But I mean, I'll give you just snapshots.
[Guest]: The first thing you could see is politicians, they also have to go by the public sentiment
[Guest]: and somehow, it's already built in public sentiment that there should be free education
[Guest]: and therefore government could deliver it.
[Guest]: However, everything is taxed and paid by citizens themselves.
[Guest]: But somehow there is this acceptance that free education should not be charged.
[Guest]: Second, whomever is providing should not make profit out of it, be it private or government
[Guest]: or anyone else, but should do it for the purpose of charity.
[Guest]: And therefore, for politicians who sincerely also want to bring change, it becomes too
[Guest]: difficult because all of a sudden there will be many organizations, unions on street protesting
[Guest]: against them that they are kind of privatizing or commercializing education or giving in
[Guest]: profit hands.
[Guest]: So that makes itself difficult.
[Guest]: That's first thing.
[Guest]: Now, second thing, I would also doubt whether politicians are so interested in doing it
[Guest]: for reasons and this parasite culture and the pressure groups that they have, with teacher
[Guest]: unions or other lobby groups to reform it.
[Guest]: Also, one thing has come to my notice is education or things like that happens to be a deliverable,
[Guest]: the outcome of which will be shown in long term.
[Guest]: So for an example, my parents decided to invest in my education and after 10-15 years only
[Guest]: they can see outcome and when the tenure is only five years or something and it to make
[Guest]: bureaucracy work and get a school sanction for any MLA or MP in the constituency will
[Guest]: take one, two, three years.
[Guest]: So the impact is not as visible and therefore, in my opinion, let's say even if I might be
[Guest]: wrong too, but their interest is more into, let's say, building toilet or giving kumble
[Guest]: or whatever, which is more of a photo opportunity that the MP MLA is doing something or cleaning
[Guest]: road or whatever.
[Guest]: So I don't really see that they are as interested.
[Guest]: Any points that you think is more relevant?
[Amit Varma]: I just want to say that I 100% agree with your opinion and this is one of the problems
[Amit Varma]: you face with governance is that politicians are always focused on the short term and like
[Amit Varma]: you correctly said, something like investments in anything that show results in the long
[Amit Varma]: term, beyond the five-year term of a politician, therefore become pointless.
[Amit Varma]: They are more interested in optics and photo opportunity, which a toilet shawl will provide
[Amit Varma]: more than something that is more abstract, especially if it means withdrawing from the,
[Amit Varma]: you know, removing restrictions on private schools.
[Amit Varma]: The government servant can't then, there's nothing concrete for him to show too, because
[Amit Varma]: it seems like, I mean, what have you done?
[Amit Varma]: But what you correctly pointed out earlier and something that makes me almost despair
[Amit Varma]: is this attitude that Indians have that whatever problems we have, the government is a solution.
[Amit Varma]: People realizing that in cases like education, for example, the government is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one example I often kind of try to point out is that, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: say that, look, education is so important, so the government has to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And my reply to that always is that it is because education is so important and crucial
[Amit Varma]: that the government must allow society to participate in it.
[Amit Varma]: And like, I'm an 80s child and the classic analog I give is of telecom and airlines and
[Amit Varma]: especially telecom, that those were government monopolies in the 80s, it took you five years
[Amit Varma]: to get, you had a five year waiting list for a telephone and then private players were
[Amit Varma]: allowed.
[Amit Varma]: And if you go by the same rhetoric they give behind education, then you would expect the
[Amit Varma]: quality to drop, the private players to exploit customers and the prices to be too high.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, what you have is an explosion in quality because of competition and because
[Amit Varma]: of those incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And now today, the poorest of the poor have smartphones, even if they're not educated,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and it's one of the great tragedies of our country.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes me angrier and angrier as the years go by.
[Guest]: And the students are able to understand English today because of mobile English keypad rather
[Guest]: than going to school and understanding English.
[Guest]: Anyways, something that I also wanted to talk more because these days, the anger comes out
[Guest]: is you did not contest my insight of education being fraud, otherwise they could have given
[Amit Varma]: you several examples.
[Amit Varma]: Let's imagine, I know, because I agree with you, but I know much less about why it is
[Amit Varma]: a fraud.
[Guest]: So let's assume for a moment that I have contested it, I have said, no, Amit is not a fraud.
[Guest]: So why don't you elaborate?
[Guest]: Because we started talking about government teachers also and how even they are victim.
[Guest]: One of the things I can talk about is at the beginning of the session around March or April,
[Guest]: try going to meet any of the education minister at the residence or office or education secretary
[Guest]: in any of the state.
[Guest]: What you'll find that there is a huge crowd.
[Guest]: And you'll find most of the people in the crowd are teachers.
[Guest]: Now these teachers are there lined up at the house of education minister.
[Guest]: And if you investigate into the reason, you'll find they're mainly asking for their transfer
[Guest]: and posting.
[Guest]: And then certainly minister would do whatever formally has to do.
[Guest]: There will be a guy, more like an agent or mediator or whomever you call it, would be
[Guest]: there who would then deal with them.
[Guest]: So fix up a certain price and that.
[Guest]: So if you pay, then you will get your desired postings, etc.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That itself has become a massive fraud.
[Guest]: At places though, this was being done at a secretary level.
[Guest]: Then ministers realized that we are losing money that we can make.
[Guest]: So ministers have taken, in some states, lets me, I hope I go back home, as chief minister
[Guest]: realized that there is enough to make.
[Guest]: Those kind of people don't listen to this podcast, so don't worry about that.
[Guest]: At times, I remember at some education minister office that I had gone to meet, and a teacher
[Guest]: walked in for the same request.
[Guest]: And he says, no, no, now chief minister is looking directly at us.
[Amit Varma]: So it's become so lucrative.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that is the kind of day to day examples that you get.
[Guest]: And then you think of, do we as a country have some hope?
[Amit Varma]: So you're someone who's not only been a researcher and shredded all this, but you've also been
[Amit Varma]: an activist and you've tried to bring about change.
[Guest]: I mean, you are in a sense, the other big thing happens in your marks inflation, right?
[Guest]: So there are boards, education board, each state has education board and CBSE, ICSE and
[Guest]: IG and all of that.
[Guest]: Specifically, one fraud thing started with the evolution of CBSE itself.
[Guest]: So if you remember, I, as I said, I'm from UP, I went to a state affiliated board school.
[Guest]: So at our age, at that time, there was this chief minister called Kalyan Singh, right?
[Guest]: And people say I passed high school or intermediate in Kalyan Singh's regime, which means before
[Guest]: that was Mulayam Singh and at the Mulayam Singh time, they were very generous and liberal
[Guest]: with cheating approach.
[Guest]: You know, today, you can see Bihar, the massive, you know, cheating their parents or friends
[Guest]: who are helping them to copy.
[Guest]: So that used to happen and therefore Kalyan Singh.
[Guest]: So on what the main point I want to come to, on an average, if you see the result every
[Guest]: year would be 30%, 40%, maximum 50% students who have passed.
[Guest]: And the topper of the state would have 82%, 83%, right?
[Guest]: Now, then CBSE came in and CBSE had a different marking pattern.
[Guest]: And therefore, the similar kind of average student like me, if I'm getting 50% marks
[Guest]: in state board, I would get 65 or 70% mark in CBSE board, right?
[Guest]: Slowly that state realized that all of these CBSE students are easily getting admission
[Guest]: later on in, let's say, Delhi University or whatever university for college.
[Guest]: And our students are not finding admission.
[Guest]: If the admission is based on your high school and enter marks, and therefore they also started
[Guest]: figuring out other ways of inflating the mark, inflating or changing the marking pattern
[Guest]: so that students get more marks.
[Guest]: There happens to be one more dynamics here.
[Guest]: So every time, and let's say as an education minister, I want to show my performance that
[Guest]: I have done very good in education segment or like we recently, last year in Punjab,
[Guest]: the education secretary was expelled, he was fired because of the poor percentage of result.
[Guest]: So you want to show that earlier, 50% students used to pass, we have improved so much that
[Guest]: 70% students are passing, right?
[Guest]: Something similar is happening in Delhi also, currently they're debating, our students
[Guest]: are performing very well, right?
[Guest]: I won't get into that Delhi debate, I can get into that separately.
[Guest]: But states are also inflating, state boards are inflating marks to show that we are doing
[Guest]: a good job.
[Guest]: Students are studying more.
[Guest]: Look, the results of this government school are also coming out very well.
[Guest]: And even CBSE adopted this system, what they called it, moderation system.
[Guest]: So they figured out scientifically and justified ways of giving you more and more marks.
[Guest]: That is another level of fraud happening.
[Amit Varma]: And then we say, okay, the kid looks dumb, but he has 90% marks.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember back in the day in my 10th and 12th, I got like around 70% and my now
[Amit Varma]: wife got a little more than me.
[Amit Varma]: And we were just talking like a couple of days back that boss, in today's time, we would
[Amit Varma]: have got admission nowhere, we are finished.
[Guest]: In Delhi, something like since Stephen College, they got 100% students with 100% marks as
[Guest]: admission.
[Guest]: So even you have 99, you're not going to get admission.
[Guest]: So think about it.
[Guest]: Now why is that as an activist or as a solution, if we start thinking about it, is because
[Guest]: the producer, when you design or produce is who, the same government, when the assessment
[Guest]: is happening, it's the same government, when the outcome has to be shown, it's the same
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: So as long as I monitor myself, I would give all good marks, I'll say I'm the best person
[Guest]: even better than Narendra Modi, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that is what is happening.
[Amit Varma]: Be careful what you say.
[Guest]: Not that kind of audience listens to your podcast anyway, right?
[Guest]: I mean, whomsoever.
[Guest]: So you need to bring some level of accountability and transparency in the system, otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a great insight.
[Amit Varma]: Again, to go back to the question of incentives, the government is the provider, the government
[Amit Varma]: is also the person who is ranking the quality of the provision, financing and financing
[Amit Varma]: the provision and everything, whereas, you know, in a regular market system, what you
[Amit Varma]: would really have is that it's the parents who decide, the people who are, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: they keep the system sort of accountable.
[Guest]: So, they don't take anything from the consumer, they don't get any assessment from the parents,
[Guest]: they don't get any assessment from the children, how good is the teacher, how good is the infrastructure,
[Amit Varma]: how good is your education minister.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, the fact that so many poor parents vote with their feet and take their
[Amit Varma]: children to budget private schools, is itself them assessing the state of education and
[Amit Varma]: the state then reacts by shutting down as many of those private schools as it can.
[Amit Varma]: And the other tragic point that you just pointed out, and which is, again, a great insight
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to call attention to, is the relation between optics and performance.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not, I mean, it is in the nature of governments and the parties that are ruling
[Amit Varma]: the governments at any time, that their incentive is not really to perform because no one's
[Amit Varma]: holding them accountable.
[Amit Varma]: But their incentive is to focus on optics like, look, so many kids have passed and it's
[Amit Varma]: more than last time, because they want to get re-elected.
[Amit Varma]: And again, the incentives are completely destroyed.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I sort of want to ask is that, you've not only, you know, done a lot
[Amit Varma]: of research and gained a lot of insight into this field, but you've also been an activist
[Amit Varma]: and a very passionate activist who's, you know, you meet politicians all the time, you
[Amit Varma]: meet bureaucrats all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So my two part question is that, what level of acceptance is there among these individuals
[Amit Varma]: in government, you know, outside of their roles and their incentives, that there is
[Amit Varma]: a problem and that, you know, that it has to be fixed?
[Amit Varma]: That's part one.
[Amit Varma]: And part two is that going beyond this acceptance of, going beyond this recognition of the problem,
[Amit Varma]: has there been any movement towards a solution in all the time that you've been working?
[Guest]: This is a difficult one.
[Guest]: Because to answer this, I will have to decode all of these conversations that I have with
[Guest]: politicians and policy makers and, and I'll have to base my judgment on that everything
[Guest]: that they're saying is sincere and true.
[Guest]: Yeah, which you have a sense of whether it's not by...
[Guest]: So I do think that in a certain level and within the government also they realize.
[Guest]: So number one, because they have designed and they are doing it, they know it.
[Guest]: But as I said, the major, major challenge for education sector happens to be this public
[Guest]: sentiment itself, the moment that is changed, or politicians get a sense that people are
[Guest]: open for change.
[Guest]: And if by bringing some sort of reform, I would not be thrown out of office, they would
[Guest]: be open to it.
[Guest]: The other way of thinking is until it becomes inevitable.
[Guest]: I know with my conversation with people, formally and informally, they, whenever they have realized,
[Guest]: in fact, we had, I personally had high hope with this current MHRD minister and the secretary
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: And specifically the secretary, however, I'm deeply, deeply disappointed, is they realize
[Guest]: it and they were trying to look for political viability of bringing some of those reforms.
[Guest]: Specifically you, so within government, there are segments, something like Niti Aayog, Niti
[Guest]: Aayog published its three years action plan.
[Guest]: And within there, there is a section on school education.
[Guest]: And they have proposed some good ideas.
[Guest]: But it's difficult at the moment.
[Guest]: Also I understand their challenge too, for currently BJP led government.
[Guest]: No matter what they do, the moment they touch education, everyone, opposition, etc., comes
[Guest]: in as a saffronizing education, or commercializing education.
[Guest]: And for that they have also, so if you know, twice they constituted committee for national
[Guest]: education policy, and yet they have not progressed on it.
[Guest]: I can't comment on future, but today or tomorrow, it's going to become inevitable and they will
[Guest]: have to do it because there is no other way than saving truth by accepting the truth.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, this has been an incredibly insightful episode and I want to end by asking
[Amit Varma]: you two questions.
[Amit Varma]: I ask all my guests on whatever subject they're talking about at that point in time, and those
[Amit Varma]: two questions are, what makes you despair about what is happening to education in this
[Amit Varma]: country?
[Amit Varma]: And what gives you hope?
[Guest]: Once again, these are difficult questions.
[Guest]: So something is why I got into it and still investing my time and energy, even it's very
[Guest]: frustrating thing to do, is we ourselves have gone through this system.
[Guest]: At times I feel that it was good to be a backbencher because the system could corrupt me less.
[Guest]: All of those in the front were highly corrupted.
[Guest]: I was also a backbencher.
[Guest]: And I have seen many of our own friends and colleagues or relatives or cousins struggling
[Guest]: with it, or even today.
[Guest]: And that makes me work on it, frankly speaking, that...
[Amit Varma]: You feel you have no choice, you owe this to...
[Guest]: We have to, because the, I mean, the pain I have seen people going through of unnecessarily,
[Guest]: for an example, let's say, parents scolding or relatives scolding for bringing lesser
[Guest]: marks than 70% or 90% or why not to study.
[Guest]: I mean, this study thing has become such a, I don't know what to call it, a big burden
[Guest]: on children.
[Guest]: All the time, parents are behind them, study, study, study.
[Guest]: See what people are teaching, what they are teaching, what relevance is going to come
[Guest]: out of it?
[Guest]: How is it going to make a difference?
[Guest]: I mean, as simple as the question I ask is, today we possibly, our average lifespan would
[Guest]: be 50 to 60 years, I assume not more than that.
[Guest]: What is so great with our education thing that I spent half of my life studying it?
[Guest]: Great point.
[Guest]: So that is what, and that is where you have to be optimistic.
[Guest]: You have to have hope that things would improve.
[Guest]: At times, and that is why my disappointment, I have seen some hope, some light at the end
[Guest]: of tunnel, but then it happens to get longer and longer.
[Amit Varma]: Amit, thanks, you've been extremely insightful over this episode and your journey is very
[Amit Varma]: inspiring and thank you so much for coming on the scene.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do follow Amit Chandra on Twitter at amitctweets, amitctweets,
[Amit Varma]: no spaces.
[Amit Varma]: The studies we spoke about on the show are linked at the bottom of this episode's page
[Amit Varma]: at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of this show, including our two previous episodes on education,
[Amit Varma]: episodes 9 and 19 at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: It's going to be hosted by my boy Tejaswin Gumber and yours truly, Ranveer Alabadia.
[Unknown]: Make sure you catch Hustle Science on the IBM podcasting app and website or any kind
[Unknown]: of podcasting platform that you use to get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: Make sure you check it out.
[Unknown]: Episodes are going to be out every single Tuesday.
[Unknown]: No, the tech world in India is surely moving double the speed of this voice
[Guest]: over.
[Unknown]: Tune in to Shunya One every Tuesday to catch us talking to the smartest people we know
[Unknown]: on the IBM podcast website, app, or wherever you get your podcasts from.